MAKING HISTORY

46

What was the Contribution of Christianity to Ireland?

Reading and writing

Christianity brought reading and writing to Ireland. The first reading and writing was
done in Latin, which was the language of the Catholic Church. It was done by the early
missionaries such as Palladius and St Patrick. New words came into the Irish language
from Latin. Very soon, manuscripts were being written in Irish. These changes brought
Ireland into written history. It also brought the learning of Roman scholars and early
Church writers to Ireland. Some of this learning was used in compiling laws for the new

Church and for society around it.

wo

 

An ogham stone with letters cut along the edge.
On the right is the ogham alphabet.

 

B-nNrwHNZ2aTrTOANOBZaAZ N DW POC M—

Ogham stones

The first form of writing in Ireland was done on the side of stones. Lines carved along
the edge of the rock represented words. The ogham alphabet of twenty letters was based
on the Latin (Roman) alphabet. But it was the coming of Christianity to Ireland that
made full use of the Roman alphabet which was used to write manuscripts in Latin and,
later, in the Irish language.

Contribution to art

Manuscripts

The monasteries produced manuscripts. Manuscripts are hand written books. The
Gospels, the psalms, the lives of saints and the Celtic sagas (legends) were written down
in Latin, the language of the Church. Later ones were written in Irish. Some manuscripts
record the events of early Irish history.
The round tower

Some of the rules of St Columbanus

St Columbanus founded monasteries in France, Germany, Switzerland and Italy from

 

 

 

@
€ pp. 26-27 [Bg]
| HISTORICAL EVIDENCE

Round towers were built in
larger monasteries, such as
Clonmacnaoise, Glendalough
and Cork. They were stone
towers between 25 and 40
metres tall, with four windows
on the top floor, facing north,
south, east and west. The towers
were used as belfries when a
handbell was rung from the top
windows to call the monks to
services. Here is a cross-section
of around tower showing
timber floors in the inside.

  

1. Which rule

585 AD until his death in Italy in 615 AD. would you
@ At the first word of a superior [those in charge] all must rise to obey, because by consider is the

obeying him they obey God.

most important,
and why?

@® The rule of silence must be carefully observed, for it is written: ‘The service of justice 2. Which rule

shall be quietness and peace’

would you
consider is the

@ The food of the monks shall be coarse, consisting of cabbage, vegetables, flour mixed least important,

with water, and a biscuit, and taken toward evening lest the stomach be burdened

and why?
3. Which rule

and the mind confused. Gorging (eating greedily) must be guarded against in eating, would you think

and drunkenness in drinking.

was the most
difficult to keep?

@ While the monks will have much in heaven, on earth they should be satisfied with

the small possessions of greatest need.

@ Let the monk live in a community under the discipline of one father and in company

with many, so that from one he may learn lowliness, from another, patience.

Work

The main activity of the monks was prayer. They had six or eight prayer services each

 

Go onto YouTube

day. During the rest of the day there was work to be done on the farm —- ploughing, ane ook up Miss
“aT: . . . . out’'s History Class
milking, and harvesting and grinding corn. In some monasteries there were lay monks _The Life of a Monk

to help out with this work.

in Early Christian
Ireland.’

The early Irish monasteries are most famous for their great works of art, which were

produced to honour God.

45
MAKING HISTORY

 

. The monastery buildings
HT ® investigate the
contribution
of Christianity
wee to culture and

society

 

1. What features show that this was a very important monastery?
2. Do you agree that the monastery was also a large town?
Explain your answers.

There were other large monasteries besides Clonmacnoise. These included Clonard,
Kells, Cork, Clonfert, Glendalough and Armagh which were built along important
routes. These were monastic towns, like Clonmacnoise, with many lay people living
around the monastery. These were important centres of economic activity.

There were also small, remote
(out of the way) monasteries
built on islands off the west coast
of Ireland. The most famous
of these is Skellig Michael, off
the coast of Co. Kerry, where
the monks lived in small stone
beehive huts beside a small
stone church.

Skellig Michael, off
the coast of Kerry
Fy

 

ADA AASce ca a

You will be able to work out some of the answers to the questions on p. 42 by matching

1-7 there with A-G on this page.

Wo

Historians say the annals

tell us about the rules and

work of monasteries. They say
Clonmacnoise was a major
centre of Christian art and
learning. They also say that

the Annals of Clonmacnoise

and other manuscripts were
produced there in a scriptorium
(room where manuscripts were
written).

Archaeology excavations show
that there is evidence of much
craftwork, animal slaughtering,
metalworking, stone-cutting
and farming at Clonmacnoise.

O

Historians studied 8 century
manuscripts which said there
were two or three rings around
large monasteries.
Archaeologists excavated a
ditch which showed a second
ring; aerial photography
showed a third outer ring
around Clonmacnoise.

Oo

Historians say the annals record
the building of the cathedral in
909 AD. They also refer to the
other churches on the site and
to the High Crosses. The annals
give the date of the round
tower aS 1124 AD.
Archaeologists have shown that
there were later changes to the
cathedral. They have analysed
the panels on the High Crosses.
They also say that postholes in
other round towers show that
wooden steps were built up to
the high door.

G

Historians have accounts which
tell how St Ciaran looked for a
site for his monastery — ‘Here
will | live’ - and began building
in 549 AD. He died shortly after
ina plague.

Archaeologists are able

to date activity on the site
through radiocarbon dating,
dendrochronology and
stratigraphy.

1. What primary sources used by historians are mentioned in the accounts here, A-G?
2. What new technology used by archaeologists are mentioned in the accounts

here, A-G?

3. Select one of the questions, 1-7, and explain how historians and archaeologists
have helped each other in answering that question?

G

Historians and archaeologists
say that the site was chosen for
the location of the monastery
because it is the junction of

the north-south route on the
navigable River Shannon with
the Eiscir Riada (Great Road) -a
great glacial deposit —- which
was the main east-west route
across Early Christian Ireland.

G

Historians Said traders

could sail up and down the
river. Archaeologists used
underwater archaeology

to discover the remains of a
wooden bridge which crossed
the Shannon there. They used
dendrochronology to date the
timber to 804 AD.

OG

Documents said that
Clonmacnoise was a large urban
centre. Historians also used old
maps to show that there was

a Fair Green where great fairs
were held.

Archaeologists used
excavations and stratigraphy
to show that a large population
lived between the first and
second rings around the
monastery. A geophysical
survey showed that
Clonmacnoise was a very large
site.

&
(p.24{E¢]
What have you learnt in relation to how
historians and archaeologists have investigated
the history of Clonmacnolse?

43
MAKING HISTORY

How do Historians and Archaeologists

 

know about Clonmacnoise?

Historians and archaeologists often begin their investigations with questions. They
research sources to provide the evidence which will answer the questions.
Clonmacnoise, on the banks of the River Shannon, just south of present-day Athlone,
was one of the greatest monasteries in Early Christian Ireland.

 
   

ee

 
 

UT

 

1. How old is
Clonmacnoise and
who founded it?

2. Didmanypeoplelive 3. Whatdid they work at?
here?

 

What questions did historians and archaeologists ask about
Clonmacnoise and where did they find some of the answers?

4. What connection did
the monastery have
with the river?

5. Why was this
location chosen for
the monastery?

6. Was there only one
wall around it?

7. What use was made
of the buildings?

ee

Eeho.2u How does new technology help in the investigating and

Are there any other questions

you wouldlike toaddtothe Understanding what life was like in Clonmacnoise?

questions above about
Clonmacnoise?

Tr Er ere =~

 

Go onto YouTube and
look up ‘The Lost City of
Clonmacnoise - Secret
of the Stones Excerpt’.
Next, look up ‘The Lost
City of Clonmacnoise
3D App’.

-- Sr es rey em ere

Visit...
Clonmacnoise,
Co Offaly

 

a oe

Geophysical survey

42

  

 

Underwater archaeology
EARLY CHRISTIAN Lae a

l mene I i

 

@ Metal-working and stone-carving produced great works of art

® Visitors were welcomed

However, the monks lived simple lives:
@® They followed strict rules, with an abbott in charge

ee ee 3

1. What does this

 

  

@ They produced their own food map tell you
@® They wore long tunics with woollen cloaks, and shoes or sandals about how
Ireland was
converted to
Christian missions to Ireland in the fifth centur enestian ty?
y 2. Is this a primary

Monasteries in
early Christian
Ireland

Inishmurray fa

Killala

Roscommon

43

Con Sgn i
se Tuam

J Clonmacnoise

u

& Rathlin

Coleraine

Antrim
Clgagher Bangor
Lu

Devenish Dromore g,
Y Armagh Dow/sipatrick

LiGranard
"i Ket onasterboice

Finalas
Hlasnevin

Clonard L

The Arrival of
Christianity in Ireland

 

ora secondary
source?

Royal sites

Early missionary churches
Sites called Domnach
Padraig

Main focus of

Patrick’s mission

  
   

e
agh
Emain Macha , (ai Patrick)
e e Downpatricks”

SS, y
e e
we fe |
a Cruachu e ° Ps
e e v e ®
a +
. is ; \. e — eiara

e e -
\ ) Naa
+

 

Clondalki F
Inis Mori. x) e
kKitfenora 5 sontert en “So, Dun Adilinne ¢
e
Terryglass Glerydalough J e
illaloe e
bu &aDerrynaflan Cashel
Ma Ardfert Cashel Fetns ° °
A )
, ki inisfallen tulismore_ }) | \
Skellig Cork ¥ Ardmore a .
Michdet —<> S p
? saa St Patrick from Britain, mid-5th century
==> Other missionaries

- mainly from Continent

@ 40km - late 4th-5th centuries

CHRONOLOGICAL
Be aL aps

Early Christian Ireland

 

as

When did the
monasteries spread
in Ireland?

rea ate 01 563
Contact with Roman St Colmcille founded
Britain; some Irish lona in Scotland
Aa Cl alaciercla 3

a a ee a rr
> ee | | ADI | ee | nee.) | | ADI | | |

Jeceee cece eeeeeeteeeeeeee ENT eee eee eee [[ecccccccssssssseceeccccssssssnsessececessssssnmeeeceeeecessnnnteeeseeeeessssstteeseceesssseed weeees I
5'»-7* centuries 7-9 centuries
Monastic art flourishes — Metalworking

manuscripts, High Crosses

431 432
Palladius sent Patrick sent
on mission to on mission ;
lreland to Ireland 549 590

Ee) Cae e la
Viking and
local raids on
monasteries

Spreadof :
monasteries

om Olle 18)
founded
Clonmacnoise

Columbanus began
founding monasteries
in Europe
MAKING HISTORY

QeExtracts from St Patrick's Confession

1.
My name is Patrick. |am a sinner, a simple country person, and the least of all believers. | am looked

- down upon by many. My father was Calpornius. He was a deacon; his father was Potitus, a priest,
who lived at Bannavem Taburniae. His home was near there, and that is where I was taken prisoner.
| was about sixteen at the time. At that time, | did not know the true God. | was taken into captivity
in Ireland, along with thousands of others. We deserved this, because we had gone away from God,
and did not keep his commandments.

 

2. |
It was there [in Ireland] one night in my sleep that | heard a voice saying to me: ‘You have fasted
well. Very soon you will return to your native country.’ Again after a short while, | heard someone

eeees( |) saying to me: ‘Look - your ship i is ready.’ It was not nearby, but a good two hundred miles away. |

“y ~e
sae ld -it

1. What does ~~ had never been to the place, nor did | know anyone there. So 1 ran away then, and left the man with 1
Patrick say about ‘whom| had been for: SIX years. c
himself when he :
was young? ZO a | -

2. Why did he write It was while | was there [back home in Britain] that | saw, ina vision in the night, aman whose

the Confession?
3. Why did he go
back to Britain?

name was Victoricus coming as it were from Ireland with so many letters they could not be counted.
He gave me one of these, andiread the beginning of the letter,the voice of the Irish people. While
| was reading out the beginning of the letter, | thought ! heard at that moment the voice of those

ae ae :
ob wen we ee a t= 6 ~

 

4. Why did he who were beside the wood of Voclut, near the western sea. They called out as it were with one
return to , oe - -
ireland? vaice: ‘We beg you, holy boy, to come and walk again among us.’ This touched my heart deeply, and ~
| could not read any furthér; | woke up then. Thanks be to God, after many years the Lord: granted
5. Is the Confession he hat th tli fo ~
a primary or T t emw att ey were Ca ung or. :
a secondary “
source for the oe : . | | :
life of St Patrick? -- HOW. has this happenedi in Ireland? Never before did they know of God except to serve idols and — :
6. What a _ ~ unclean things. But now, they have become the people of the Lord, and are called childrenofGod. =
information Is _ The sons and daughters of the leaders of the lrish are seen: to be monks and virgins of Christ! — 4
not included od
ae a oe wom “(Soutce: www. confessio. ie/etexts/contessio. english#o2) 4
Early Irish monasteries
aa In the sixth century (500-599 AD) and after,
a ele ac aie } many monasteries were built in Ireland. Holy
Patrick provides no dates in his Confession. Later men who wanted places to pray and honour
writers provide some of the dates but they may be ;
vVcelat=a God founded most of the monasteries. However,

CT Ya lata lale women, such as, St Ita and St Brigid, also
403 Captured as a slave

409 Escaped and returned to Britain

va Trained as a priest and bishop
432 St Patrick came back to Ireland as Clonmacnoise and St Brendan of Clonfert built

founded some. Men such as St Enda in the Aran
Islands, St Finian of Clonard, St Ciaran of

missionary monasteries, which became centres of learning
re. yonl Death of St Patrick and culture:

@ The Bible was studied
@® Manuscripts (hand written books) were
studied
Early Christian Ireland

a © Describe th
Pre-Christian Ireland story ofthe
Before the coming of Christianity to Ireland, the country was dominated by Celtic Christen ;

. ; i ity to
culture. The Celtic way of life had come to Ireland about 900 years before. It coincided ireland

with the development of the Iron Age, when iron replaced bronze as the main metal for

weapons and tools.

Unlike Britain, the Romans had not conquered Ireland. The Celtic language, laws
and religion were spoken and practised here. The druids, or priests, controlled the Celtic
religion. It was a pagan religion which believed in many gods.

The coming of Christianity to Ireland

There were Christians in Ireland by the early fifth century (400-499 AD). Some came
from Roman Britain, where they had been captured in raids by Irish warriors, while
others were Irish people who had been converted during contact with Christians in ey)

Britain.

The pope sent a number of missionaries to visit the Irish Christians. The first of
these was Palladius, who was sent in 431 AD as a bishop to ‘the Irish who believe in

ale CHRISTIAN IRELAND ==
ae ae I ii

 

 

© Consider the meaning

of ‘historically

Significant’

monasteries

© Outline some of the
work of the early Irish

© Investigate how
historians and

archaeologists know
about Clonmacnoise

(url

Celtic Ireland

Go onto YouTube and
look up ‘Miss Stout's
History Class The

Celts’

Christ’. But the most famous of the missionaries was St Patrick, who told his story in his

Confession.

St Patrick

St Patrick was born in Roman Britain, but at the age of sixteen he was captured by Irish
raiders. He was kept as a slave for six years, tending sheep on mountains in the West of
Ireland. Then he escaped and eventually returned to his family in Britain. Some time
later, he became a priest and bishop and returned to Ireland as a missionary.

Through the work of St Patrick and other missionaries, Ireland was largely a Christian
country by the early sixth century. The coming of Christianity made significant changes
to Irish culture and society. It replaced the pagan religion and many Celtic festivals
became Christian festivals instead. For the rest of this chapter, we will consider other

significant changes.

What is St Patrick’s Confession?

The Confession is an account written by St
Patrick. It gives brief details of his life. It
explains why he did certain things and it
defends his good name against any attack on
his character. The Book of Armagh, housed in
Trinity College, Dublin contains the earliest
copy of Saint Patrick’s Confession known to
exist.

WHAT DOES ‘HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT’ MEAN?

Definition: The significance of something is the importance

that it has, usually because it will have an effect on a situation or
shows something about a situation. (Collins English Dictionary)

Historically significant events include those that resulted in
great change over long periods of time for large numbers of
people.

In relation to Early Christian Ireland, you will be asked to judge

@® How did the events cause change?

® What impact/effect did the events have on their own
time?

® What impact/effect do the events have on us today?

39
STOTT E 1a ray elOlO nia THOM 1a 2000 BC it]
UUEBEA ELSA URED EROR ORES EROS OUEEE LORD EL OR OU OR RUA ERE OO GU ORO ER ORR AA SEER YOUR OU ODO E ROR OREM ORO UO GUO O EROS AO aOR OR OR OR ORO RRE DOR OU ORT ER ER ER OREO L OTST ORR OR ORO ee
re oe on: Os re ce SY
; a ’ . ‘ ae ; . a * ; e . ; = at aR) a ' a ra = ; = . - P)
ee | 7
C3 ee od
Ss 6, 3 EARLY CHRISTIAN IRELAND
L.O. 2.6 >
PS ae The Nature of History: 11. me
_ CHRONOLOGICAL - ey babe LB
erat) Se re ya | | }
Old Se Age CBAL aan
No evidence of people i
8009 __living in Ireland CBA2 a
le :
; e to eee
i You will On torical significance of
3 @® consider the his fas
— istianit tani
, Christianity a stion of Christianity to
7. nsider the contribu hristian ireland
- , : Fr “wm Milddle Stone Age © Co nd society in Early C
|W a WON rreltiaalcey| culture a € History
i i OO Beene he Nature ot Fl
4 ¥ Lae . re t €
Be e, Ireland @ Explo
NESS oe
; 4 aoa an ; :
nt " Ae § en a
7 Aas Rel aN sd= ; sa ™ a Bat = ee oe aan
: (Neolithic) ce OO ah J : tongs ys
SB Oso a: | —
: inlreland : |
OEE LS a A ar I a SCNT ng emerges GRrmeeserp yew aero coe
7 H Skellig Michael Clonmacnoise
2009 What do these pictures tell you about Early Christian Ireland?
i Bronze Age
a '. Fie aie U Sei aon
a : @® Excavations © Manuscripts ® Sources
i @ Evidence ® Radiocarbon dating © Dendrochronology
ets e Stratigraphy @ Monastery @ Beehive hut
Oo senile @ Round Tower e@High Cross @ Scribe
: arrival of Celts . . .
® Tonsure @ Scriptorium @ Chalice
= Early Christian Ireland aF
- @ @
saeaeenenenee V0 0\(-| 06) O18 -1 8-181 87 Crozier Filigree